BASICS.md, before:

# Pile Basics

**Welcome to Pile programming language**

This file is meant to be read by more experienced programmers.

If you aren't into stack-based programming or any concept like that or you're just new to all this,
it's recommended to read the actual documentation of Pile.

> **NOTE**: This file is not meant to be any kind of reference or documentation. For now, this file is just a simple way of understanding the basics of the language in a few minutes without further explanation.

> **WARNING**: The content of this file is not revised. You can find outdated, unimplemented content or grammar mistakes. This file is provisory.   

## Introduction to Pile

Pile relies on a stack-based architecture to manipulate data and create algorithms.

It also uses the concept of LIFO (Last-in, First-out) that may confuse the beginners at the start because of the reversed order of operands when working with some kinds of operations. More of this will be mentioned.

A stack in a stack-oriented paradigm is essentially an "infinite" array where you can push, duplicate, or remove items.

### Rules:

- A Pile program operates on **one global stack**.
- This stack cannot be divided or replaced.
- All operations interact with this same stack.


## Simple operations

### Math

```pile
1 1 +    # Adds 1 and 1 (Result: 2)
1 1 -    # Adds 1 and 1, then subtracts 1 (Result: 0)
2 2 *    # Multiplies 2 by 2 (Result: 4)
2 10 /   # Divides 10 by 2 (Result: 5)
2 10 %   # Modulo 10 by 2 (Result: 0)
2 10 **  # Raises 10 to the 2nd power (Result: 100)
```

### Comparisons

```pile
10 10 =    # Checks if 10 equals 10 (true)
10 11 !=   # Checks if 11 is not equal to 10 (true)
10 12 <=   # Checks if 12 is less than or equal to 10 (false)
10 12 >=   # Checks if 12 is greater than or equal to 10 (true)
10 12 >    # Checks if 12 is greater than 10 (true)
10 12 <    # Checks if 12 is less than 10 (false)
```

### Bitwise

```pile
1     ~     # Bitwise NOT (Result: 0)
1 0   |     # Bitwise OR (Result: 1)
1 0   &     # Bitwise AND (Result: 0)
1 0   >>    # Bitwise SHIFT LEFT (Result: 0)
1 0   <<    # Bitwise SHIFT RIGHT (Result: 0)
```

## Stack Manipulation

### Operations

```pile
420     drop  # Deletes (drops) the last item on the stack
45      dup   # Duplicates (copies) the last item on the stack
45 5    swap  # Swaps the last pair of items on the stack (45 5 to 5 45)
45 5    over  # Copies the second last item and pushes it onto the stack (45 5 to 45 5 45)
45 5 12 rot   # Copies the third last item and pushes it onto the stack (45 5 12 to 5 12 45)
```

### Literals

A literal value is any value that you can write (hardcode) into your program. Pile has (for now, it will be updated soon) 2 datatypes:
- `string`: Array of unicode characters. Syntax: `"[your text]"`
- `number`: Base-10 number. Can be any combination of any length of the decimal digits. 

- Examples:
  - Numbers: `5`, `7`, `10`, `120`
  - Strings: `"hello world"`, `"foo bar baz"`

**Any** literal value written in Pile is **always** interpreted as a "push" operation onto the stack.

## Control Flow

### If

```pile
10 10 = if
    "true case" trace # Use trace as a debug operation to check values
else  # Optional
    "false case" trace
end
```

### Loop

```pile
loop
    "this will trace forever" trace
    # Use `stop` to break the loop
end
```

## Procedures

### Overview

- A procedure in Pile is a reusable block of code that is executed when it's called.
- In Pile, procedures do not have arguments or return values.
- The stack is used to pass and store data simultaneously.

### Examples

```pile
proc trace_hello
    "hello" trace
end
trace_hello # Output: hello
```

```
proc add_1
    1 +  # Assumes a value is already on the stack
end
add_1      # Error!
1 add_1    # Output: 2
```

## Definitions

### Overview

- A definition in Pile is a constant value computed at the time of its creation bound to a name.
- A definition pushes its value onto the stack when used.

### Examples
```pile
def SUN 1 end
def MON 1 end
def TUE 1 end
def WED 1 end
def THU 1 end
def FRI 1 end
def SAT 1 end
def TOTAL
    SUN
    MON +
    TUE +
    WED +
    THU +
    FRI +
    SAT +
end
TOTAL trace
```

```
def AUTHOR "marc-dantas" end
AUTHOR trace # Output: marc-dantas
```
## Global Variables

### Overview

- A global variable in Pile is a binding to a value.
- A global variable pushes its stored value onto the stack when used.
- Global variables can't be destroyed.
- Global variables are mutable.

### Examples
```pile
"Hello World" let message

message println
```

```
proc squared
    let n
    n dup *
end

10 squared println
```

## Local Variables

### Overview

- A local variable in Pile is a binding to a value that is destroyed after the end of a scope block.
- A local variable pushes its stored value onto the stack when used  (if it is still a valid binding).
- Local variables are also mutable.

### Examples
```pile
"Hello World" as message let
    message println # result: Hello World
end

# error! this variable was destroyed!
message println
```

```
proc takes_a_and_b
    as a b let
        a b +
    end
end

1 1 takes_a_and_b println # output: 2
```

**More about Pile programming language can be found in the [official documentation](https://pile-lang.vercel.app/docs).**

---

> Licensed under [GPL-3.0](./LICENSE)

> By Marcio Dantas

Commit message:

changed stop to break and added continue to loops

BASICS.md, after:

# Pile Basics

**Welcome to Pile programming language**

This file is meant to be read by more experienced programmers.

If you aren't into stack-based programming or any concept like that or you're just new to all this,
it's recommended to read the actual documentation of Pile.

> **NOTE**: This file is not meant to be any kind of reference or documentation. For now, this file is just a simple way of understanding the basics of the language in a few minutes without further explanation.

> **WARNING**: The content of this file is not revised. You can find outdated, unimplemented content or grammar mistakes. This file is provisory.   

## Introduction to Pile

Pile relies on a stack-based architecture to manipulate data and create algorithms.

It also uses the concept of LIFO (Last-in, First-out) that may confuse the beginners at the start because of the reversed order of operands when working with some kinds of operations. More of this will be mentioned.

A stack in a stack-oriented paradigm is essentially an "infinite" array where you can push, duplicate, or remove items.

### Rules:

- A Pile program operates on **one global stack**.
- This stack cannot be divided or replaced.
- All operations interact with this same stack.


## Simple operations

### Math

```pile
1 1 +    # Adds 1 and 1 (Result: 2)
1 1 -    # Adds 1 and 1, then subtracts 1 (Result: 0)
2 2 *    # Multiplies 2 by 2 (Result: 4)
2 10 /   # Divides 10 by 2 (Result: 5)
2 10 %   # Modulo 10 by 2 (Result: 0)
2 10 **  # Raises 10 to the 2nd power (Result: 100)
```

### Comparisons

```pile
10 10 =    # Checks if 10 equals 10 (true)
10 11 !=   # Checks if 11 is not equal to 10 (true)
10 12 <=   # Checks if 12 is less than or equal to 10 (false)
10 12 >=   # Checks if 12 is greater than or equal to 10 (true)
10 12 >    # Checks if 12 is greater than 10 (true)
10 12 <    # Checks if 12 is less than 10 (false)
```

### Bitwise

```pile
1     ~     # Bitwise NOT (Result: 0)
1 0   |     # Bitwise OR (Result: 1)
1 0   &     # Bitwise AND (Result: 0)
1 0   >>    # Bitwise SHIFT LEFT (Result: 0)
1 0   <<    # Bitwise SHIFT RIGHT (Result: 0)
```

## Stack Manipulation

### Operations

```pile
420     drop  # Deletes (drops) the last item on the stack
45      dup   # Duplicates (copies) the last item on the stack
45 5    swap  # Swaps the last pair of items on the stack (45 5 to 5 45)
45 5    over  # Copies the second last item and pushes it onto the stack (45 5 to 45 5 45)
45 5 12 rot   # Copies the third last item and pushes it onto the stack (45 5 12 to 5 12 45)
```

### Literals

A literal value is any value that you can write (hardcode) into your program. Pile has (for now, it will be updated soon) 2 datatypes:
- `string`: Array of unicode characters. Syntax: `"[your text]"`
- `number`: Base-10 number. Can be any combination of any length of the decimal digits. 

- Examples:
  - Numbers: `5`, `7`, `10`, `120`
  - Strings: `"hello world"`, `"foo bar baz"`

**Any** literal value written in Pile is **always** interpreted as a "push" operation onto the stack.

## Control Flow

### If

```pile
10 10 = if
    "true case" trace # Use trace as a debug operation to check values
else  # Optional
    "false case" trace
end
```

### Loop

```pile
loop
    "this will trace forever" trace
    # Use `break` to break the loop
    # Use `continue` to go to the next iteration of the loop
end
```

## Procedures

### Overview

- A procedure in Pile is a reusable block of code that is executed when it's called.
- In Pile, procedures do not have arguments or return values.
- The stack is used to pass and store data simultaneously.

### Examples

```pile
proc trace_hello
    "hello" trace
end
trace_hello # Output: hello
```

```
proc add_1
    1 +  # Assumes a value is already on the stack
end
add_1      # Error!
1 add_1    # Output: 2
```

## Definitions

### Overview

- A definition in Pile is a constant value computed at the time of its creation bound to a name.
- A definition pushes its value onto the stack when used.

### Examples
```pile
def SUN 1 end
def MON 1 end
def TUE 1 end
def WED 1 end
def THU 1 end
def FRI 1 end
def SAT 1 end
def TOTAL
    SUN
    MON +
    TUE +
    WED +
    THU +
    FRI +
    SAT +
end
TOTAL trace
```

```
def AUTHOR "marc-dantas" end
AUTHOR trace # Output: marc-dantas
```
## Global Variables

### Overview

- A global variable in Pile is a binding to a value.
- A global variable pushes its stored value onto the stack when used.
- Global variables can't be destroyed.
- Global variables are mutable.

### Examples
```pile
"Hello World" let message

message println
```

```
proc squared
    let n
    n dup *
end

10 squared println
```

## Local Variables

### Overview

- A local variable in Pile is a binding to a value that is destroyed after the end of a scope block.
- A local variable pushes its stored value onto the stack when used  (if it is still a valid binding).
- Local variables are also mutable.

### Examples
```pile
"Hello World" as message let
    message println # result: Hello World
end

# error! this variable was destroyed!
message println
```

```
proc takes_a_and_b
    as a b let
        a b +
    end
end

1 1 takes_a_and_b println # output: 2
```

**More about Pile programming language can be found in the [official documentation](https://pile-lang.vercel.app/docs).**

---

> Licensed under [GPL-3.0](./LICENSE)

> By Marcio Dantas
