README.md, before:

# Pile

**Pile is a concatenative programming language designed to teach programming logic, stack-based concepts, and computer science fundamentals.**  

## Getting Started
> **WARNING**: This language is not finished, there's no warranty of this software in any way. **Use it at your own risk**!.

### Prerequisites
To build Pile from source, you need [Rust programming language](https://rust-lang.org/) compiler and [Cargo package manager](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/cargo/) installed.

### Using Pile

Clone the repository, go into the repository's directory and run:
```console
$ cargo build --release # or cargo b -r
```

Use the interpreter by running the executable in `target/release/`:
```console
$ ./target/release/pile # or pile.exe on Windows
```

## Documentation

Pile's full documentation and website can be visited at [pile-online.vercel.app](https://pile-lang.vercel.app).

If you want a quick approach to the language basics, consider taking a look at the [`BASICS.md`](./BASICS.md) file.

## Code examples
Explore the [`./examples`](./examples) folder for code examples.

## Editors
- [Sublime Text](https://www.sublimetext.com/): [here](./editor/Pile.sublime-syntax)

## Goals and Ideas
You can read the [`GOALS.md`](./GOALS.md) file to find out what I want to implement in the language in the future and some ideas.

---

> Licensed under **GPL 3.0**. See [`LICENSE`](./LICENSE) for details.

> By [Marcio Dantas](https://github.com/marc-dantas)

Commit message:

changed README.md and removed BASICS.md

README.md, after:

# Pile

**Pile is a simple, general-purpose concatenative scripting programming language meant to be minimal in syntax and intuitive.**  

## Getting Started
> **WARNING**: This language is not finished, there's no warranty of this software in any way. **Use it at your own risk**!.

### Prerequisites
To build Pile from source, you need [Rust programming language](https://rust-lang.org/) compiler and [Cargo package manager](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/cargo/) installed.

### Using Pile

Clone the repository, go into the repository's directory and run:
```console
$ cargo build --release # or cargo b -r
```

Use the interpreter by running the executable in `target/release/`:
```console
$ ./target/release/pile # or pile.exe on Windows
```

## Learning resources
Pile's full documentation and website can be visited at [pile-online.vercel.app](https://pile-lang.vercel.app).

## Code examples
Explore the [`./examples`](./examples) folder for code examples.

## Editors
- [Sublime Text](https://www.sublimetext.com/): [here](./editor/Pile.sublime-syntax)

## Goals and Ideas
You can read the [`GOALS.md`](./GOALS.md) file to find out what I want to implement in the language in the future and also some ideas.

---

> Licensed under **GPL 3.0**. See [`LICENSE`](./LICENSE) for details.

> By [Marcio Dantas](https://github.com/marc-dantas)
